[Music]
hey everybody
welcome to another episode of
conversations with tom i am here with
somebody who i am so obsessed with i
know i say this every time
uh but hopefully in my consistency
people will see just how true that is
ryan holiday welcome to the show man
thanks so much it's uh it's always
awesome to talk i feel like this is the
only time that we end up talking
yeah it's kind of sad like especially
now in this world where everybody's
getting isolated
um i am deeply distressed that we're not
actually sharing
space while we record this as this has
always been a a great excuse this is i
think the third
time fourth time like you've been like
yeah i don't remember
so it is um it's always been a great
excuse for us to
to come together and actually be in a
space so very sad that this one is
virtual but
super excited to get into some of the
cool things that you've been working on
with your new book lives of the stoics
and i want to
immediately put it into context of
what's going on right now
so i've been i've been shaken by what
i'll say
i'll round to the sort of culture wars
which i
never ever thought that i would think
about or spend any time i'm like there
are
people smarter than i that that should
be engaged and
then i started to feel like a coward
because part of why i was remaining
silent
as i saw this sort of what i will call a
madness reaching
a crescendo was i was doing it for
business reasons i thought
i'll just keep my head down and like you
know keep doing my thing and i thought
[__] if i come out and start
telling people sort of where i'm at what
i'm thinking through it could be bad for
business and so that
propelled me to start talking about it
because i didn't like the way that it
made me feel like a coward
and as i was reading lives of the stoics
it seemed to have immediate implications
how do you think the stoics would
interpret this or even you
having sort of become a stoic if i may
uh interpret all this i i'm really glad
you said that because it's it's
something i struggle with too
like on the one hand as someone who
makes work
you're trying to make work for as many
people as possible not not just
like for financial reasons but the whole
point of having something to say is that
you want people to hear it
and then so there's this kind of tension
between
well if i talk about these safe things
i'll reach as many people as possible
and then over here there's like this
unpleasant issue and then over here
there's perhaps this
you know politically divisive issue and
if i touch either one i'm going to
either turn people off or i'm gonna get
a bunch of nasty emails about it and so
there's
this sort of dilemma i think we
fantasize that it would be wonderful to
kind of be above it all like
oh i'm just this kind of personality i'm
just kind of
uh you know i just focus on this like
for me i'd be like oh i
i just talk about ancient philosophy
therefore like
it's not relevant to what's happening
right now and that
i think what i've taken from the stoics
like i think
my early writing about the stokes i was
i was primarily
looking at at these things the way you
do which is like
how does it make you better how does it
make you more resilient how does it make
you smarter better stronger faster
and i think the more you study
the the true greats you realize that
they weren't just trying to get
six-pack abs or to make a few million
dollars like
the whole point was to have as much imp
to go to the point of your show to have
as much impact as possible and and by
impact they they weren't just thinking
about sort of external
you know superficial success but like
really making a difference in the world
and so as i've as i've gone deeper and
deeper into stoicism you realize like oh
these people were deeply politically and
culturally engaged
and i got an email from someone
yesterday they were like
how dare you talk about politics like
and they said you know what would seneca
what would marcus aurelius think about
what you were saying
and and look i i i hadn't even said
anything sort of super political but
i said you know i i got a little upset
and i responded i was like
what would seneca the senator cato the
senator
marcus aurelius the emperor you know uh
rutilius rufus the
the the governor uh uh junius rusticus
the mayor
you know diogenes and and and um
antipater the diplomats like what would
they think about me making a political
statement i mean
they would they would be totally fine
with it and i think this is the other
part that we're losing culturally
even if they disagreed with my political
statement
they wouldn't get butt hurt about it
because they understand that
people have differing opinions and it's
in the discussion about these things
that that progress is made so i'm i'm
struggling with that myself and i think
where i've gotten with it is like i'm
gonna say what i think and feel
and if people don't like it that's not
my problem you know what i mean
i i'm i'm not gonna you know i i
the the response that i got the other
night was from someone
who responds i send out this this email
every month where i recommend books and
they said why is your opinion in this
and i said this entire email is my
opinion that is literally
what it is based on i'm not gonna keep
my opinion
out of it because you are too sensitive
to hear that opinion
yeah that that is a question i find
very bizarre so if you were a journalist
and your job was to sort of present
facts to let people know what was going
on i could understand although
journalism obviously
um has morphed into something different
and and i won't even
make a judgment on whether it's good or
bad it just seems to have become very
different than maybe where it was 20 or
30 years ago
and the like doing a show like this
what the value that i get out of
watching shows like this is that people
are helping me think through a problem
and if they aren't presenting how
they're processing it then it becomes
harder for me to make sense of my own
world and so
you know the the weinstein brothers
yes the weinstein brothers um will
talk a lot about the sense-making
apparatus and you know podcasts have
largely become
a part of that and it's like look i'm
i'm going to walk you through how i'm
thinking through it not every like there
are people way smarter than me
um and by all means if you resonate with
where they're at and how they're going
through it then
seek them out my thing is for a certain
type of person
that thinks in a certain way i might by
um showing how i process something might
be able to add some benefit and also
there's this quote i heard and i forget
who said it but i i speak not so that i
can be understood but so that i can
understand and a lot of the dialogue is
just me trying to figure out what the
[__] do i actually think like this [__]
is crazy
but in in reading your um
most recent book one of the notes that i
took was
that you're um reading on stoicism which
i resonate with very very much
and it's what you just went through but
um said maybe slightly different is that
stoicism is essentially a philosophy of
action
and not a philosophy of talk and to me
it's like
when when i get on that vein like i want
to jump grab things bite them
scream yell so that people understand
like to me it's that utility utility
is what matters and getting people
thinking about the world
in a way solely to inform how you act
like the only thing i care about is your
behaviors
the things you actually do and so when i
think about
um people sort of pontificating in a
realm
of above the realities of the world
um theoretical notions it's not very
interesting like i want to know what
does this look like down in the mud
well so two things pop up to me so one
you know in the ancient world and this
this is something i talked a little bit
in the book
that the sort of the two rival schools
were the epicureans and the stoics
and in truth the epic you know despite
what the word stoic means and epicurean
means
this that's not what the philosophies
were about in fact the philosophies were
very very similar
but the the sort of core methodology of
the epicureans was they sort of they
retreated to what was known as the
garden
that was this sort of beautiful compound
that epicurus had
and they kind of focused on their their
own internal self-development
they they went it's like they left
almost like a monk
going into a monastery they went there
they looked inward they improved
themselves
and they said the world is broken the
world is dysfunctional people suck
i'm not gonna get involved in that and
the stoics
said we agree with all that but we feel
obligated to
contribute to play a role to make a
difference and so
like that seneca sort of surmising the
difference between the school says
you know epicurus says in you know if
you can
and like he basically says unless it's
an emergency don't get involved in
politics
and uh he's saying zeno says
uh unless there's an emergency exemption
you have to be involved in politics and
so i don't
think that just means like you know you
should be watching fox news or msnbc and
following these
meaningless squabbles over these tiny
policy issues
but the idea that that democracy is this
thing that just happens and you just
live in it
is ridiculous like it's a it's a thing
that requires participation from
everyone not just voting but
but the decision to say like hey you
know like citizens are complicit
in what their governments do because the
government's power
is derived from the people's consent and
so
if you you know if if you see this
happening outside your door you see this
happening on social media and you decide
well i'm not going to get involved that
that's not me
uh i think you're you're falling down on
the job you're not doing your duty
and i think the other thing i struggle
with and i'd be curious your thoughts
i'm i'm on sort of like a text thread
with some authors i know and one of them
was saying you know like
hey you know what and i won't say what
party he was talking about but he said
hey you know what causes are you
donating to this year
uh as part of the election and and i
sort of replied and these are all good
guys i'm not like throwing them under
the bus or anything but i said like
guys like the last election was not
actually decided by money actually the
candidate that won
raised less money than the candidate
that lost so
um but what did happen is a lot of
people had opinions
that they didn't talk about because they
thought
either the result was a foregone
conclusion or they thought it wasn't
their place or they didn't want to be
attacked by trolls or whatever it was
i was like all of you guys have enormous
platforms
and yet i've seen you say nothing about
any of these
issues like the place for people who are
thought leaders or contributors or sense
makers as you said
is to help people walk through that
process
and and that's been an interesting thing
i've experienced it's like
you know people follow me because i'm
good at breaking down history because i
understand life and people and
and all this stuff and then the second i
say anything
about you know somebody's character who
holds an elected office suddenly i don't
know what the [__] i'm talking about
it's like
literally this is what i do this is like
i am a world class i'm not saying you
should just absorb my opinions because
they're my opinions
but like i'm pretty good at sizing these
things up and
seeing where they go and suddenly
because it now
challenges the identity that you picked
up from your parents and their political
party you know i'm a i'm a socialist or
something it's ridiculous
that that's the one of the things i
think is most important to
look at and when i think about identity
politics what freaks me out is
a how enticing it is to be on a team
because once you're on a team as long as
you're spouting the party line
your team is always going to have your
back the problem is when
when you do that it's the same fear that
i have around just dogma in general that
you're no longer
open to new information and this is all
predicated on a belief i have that your
current
belief set your current skill set has
already taken you as far as it's going
to take you and that to advance you must
advance you must actually improve you
must learn something new have a
breakthrough gain a new skill something
that's going to allow you to go farther
than where you already are and so
if you allow this stuff to to
crystallize
into we think this way they think this
way and that's the very thing
that puts us in a camp so if i
unless i want to lose my belonging which
of course we all have this very intense
desire to belong
unless i want to lose my belonging i
just have to take the good with the bad
right
and that's where i get scared is like
now
now we're gonna pathologize now we're
gonna we're gonna really break
and once you're no longer listening once
you're no longer trying to go oh where
am i wrong i know i'm wrong
somewhere so where am i wrong and when
you have both cam saying where am i
wrong and trying to find a better
more utilitarian something this useful
approach to life
then this it starts to get really weird
when they don't have that so
as you look at what's going on now
how do you think about that like is
there do you think it's a problem that
people
are adopting identity politics for the
reasons i just laid out
um yeah and if so like what's the way
out
yeah i think i think uh you know paul
graham talks about the more identities
you have the
more stupid you are you know like if you
say like i
am blank you've now handed over
a set of beliefs to this like
institution
or party or group of people instead of
asking yourself what you think about
each thing right
and you know the people that i admire
have
you know a bunch of independent beliefs
about different things and
you know maybe they're liberal on some
issues and conservatives on other issues
and
sometimes they vote for this party and
sometimes they vote for that party
like and the weird thing about where we
are right now politically is that like
i think so much of the issues we're
having are not
even political right like um you know
i'm gonna say that the the dangerous
name uh it's probably gonna piss people
off
i'm not opposed to donald trump because
he's a republican
i'm opposed to donald trump because he's
a [__] [__]
and a bad person do you know what i mean
like like and i i think that can be said
zooming way out if if he was a character
in a shakespeare play
he would be the villain you know if he
was like i was i was a
i live on a dirt road in texas just as
an example and we can get off politics
anytime you want so
cut me off if you think this is not
where you want to go but i live on a
dirt road
and all the neighbors have to chip in
and work on this dirt road
right and now i've been i've been
fortunate i've advised people in
washington i've been to washington
i've talked to business people that know
donald trump everything i know about
donald trump
says like and i got this great neighbor
who does most of the work on the road
and i
watched him put up this big donald trump
flag the other day
i was like dude you tirelessly work on
this road it's not your responsibility
no one pays you to do it
you're being a good neighbor a good
person you are
you you are solving a collective action
problem
donald trump is the kind of person that
doesn't pay his bills
that stiffs contractors that that
always asks what's in it for me so on
and so forth
if he lived on this road he would be the
one
doing the most damage to the road and
helping out everyone else
the least amount right and by the way
probably complaining about it the most
and so my point is it's not a political
issue it's an issue fundamentally of
character
and and i think you can look at all
these other these other things whether
it's looting in the streets or whether
it's police brutality or whether it's
you know income inequality these are not
really political issues these are
do you feel obligated to help other
human beings
right does it hurt you inside when you
see
other people are hurting now there's
lots of different ways to solve that but
the point is
i think where we're really struggling
not just in america but in the world
is agreeing that
other people matter and that we should
care about those people like
the mask thing to me is such a great
example of this like
p or let's let's even do that
a college kids partying on campus right
now
uh it's fun what that fundamentally at
the root of that
is an inability to understand how your
actions affect other people and i think
we're really struggling with that as a
society and and
and the human being the human species
have always struggled with this but
what philosophy is therefore what the
four virtues of stoicism for example are
therefore
is to help walk you through why
you can't give in to those impulses and
why you have to
create a framework that lays out your
sort of duties and obligations
and ethics as a human being otherwise
the whole thing falls apart you know and
i think
we're looking at a system right now
that's falling apart because
people fundamentally don't understand
how you know their actions impact other
people
and that's that's where we are you know
what i mean
i do it's interesting as you were
talking um
to the thing that as i've gone into this
and really looked at
how the [__] did we end up here like i
had no sense and this is just like when
lisa got sick with a microbiome issue i
didn't even know what the microbiome was
and then one day the microbiome changed
her life for sure and so
as i look at this and i start thinking
about you know um
like what's going on and what exactly
happened and i start doing my own
research and looking into
um you know what what is this sort of
frame of reference from which people are
coming at this
um i began to realize that we've hit
some sort of threshold event
and just like with lisa's microbiome
where it was like all of a sudden there
was this
radical change in her life and then by
proxy my own life
and i realized wait a second the
microbiome exists
and she had been having problem problem
problem problem problem but
none of it spilled over into it actually
being something she could notice and
then all of a sudden it hits a tipping
point a threshold moment
and boom it explodes everywhere and that
that's what has happened to me so now
i'm having that same moment of where i'm
going what what is the corollary of the
microbiome
in this moment what is it about the way
that people are thinking
because what i see is okay you've got
identity politics getting on a team okay
that
seems like it's going to lead to
competing versus cooperating that seems
like an inherent problem
and then looking at what the actual
teams are
so one we've lost this idea of that the
magic is in the friction between
the two sides and when people hear me
talk about this one of the complaints i
get is
that you know i'm saying that humans
fall into a binary camp i'm not saying
that i think human
so let me define where the friction is
the friction is between people who
their primary virtue is what you just
laid out which is compassion worrying
about other people
then on the other side this is this is
just from an evolutionary standpoint
then on the other side you have people
that say don't take advantage of me
okay so you've got these two camps and
when you look at it from an evolutionary
through an evolutionary lens you realize
you need both you
don't want to leave the members of your
tribe dying on the [__] streets
and at the same time that if you just
give give make sure everybody's safe
you get the person who's parasitic and
then just like game theory tells you
that the parasitic nature will bloom
until there's a punishment against it
and so equilibrium i think what you're
talking about is equilibrium
and and and and so of the the four stoic
virtues are courage
uh justice wisdom but the key virtue in
the ancient world is moderation
right and aristotle talks about this
moderation is one of the four virtues
yeah moderation self-discipline it's
sort of a temperance as the other
as the other rendering but aristotle
says
says that all virtues are a midpoint
between two vices
right and i think that's an important
way to think about the friction you're
talking about so it's like
you know you have if you have fear on
one hand or cowardice and then you have
recklessness
in the middle is courage right in the
you know uh
it's good to be generous but if you're
uh
sorry it's not good to be greedy but if
you're overly generous you'll give
everything away
so actually generosity is somewhere sort
of right in the middle right
and i think one of the things i think
we're losing and i'm actually encouraged
again
i don't agree with a lot of his politics
but i think it says something about
where we are politically that joe biden
is painted as a radical leftist by the
right
and then by the left he's despised for
being a moderate
right like moderation is a good thing
right like it's good he
he's not radical on either side and
that's actually what you need
especially in the american system and
and moderates i mean
the the moderates of a mitt romney is
just as important as the moderation of a
joe biden
you need uh someone who understands that
the entire american system is predicated
on the fact that
almost never will one side
get a majority or let alone a super
majority that you need to pass
legislation and so what is required is
coalitions and compromises right
and so the problem is when one side
starts to be very immoderate
the other side has to be more immoderate
too
because they don't want to comprom that
you know what i mean it's so it's
getting
further and further and further and then
what
the middle suddenly looks more and more
radical right and i think
we have this to me moderation is a key
virtue of life you don't need to be
you know you don't need to have the most
out of everyone you just need to have
enough for you
right and and so i think we're we're
losing
just that political virtue of moderation
which is like
i'm pretty sure i know what the right
solution is but i'm not going to be so
conceited or egotistical to think that i
know
everything and that i need to dominate
the other side like we're
we're entering a political system where
one side thinks they need to
own the other side and you gotta dunk on
these [__] man
exactly dunking is the worst political
trend you can imagine it's like
i think you know even even like how
we've come to see the supreme court
the supreme court is supposed to be an
impartial body of of legal experts
who you know consult the constitution
and help us
solve our most vexing legal questions
the idea isn't you win enough elections
you stack the judiciary
then you ram legislation through
and then because you've bought the
referees the other side is screwed
when a case becomes comes before the
supreme court you know like
like so even you see this now besides
our justices
and it's like no the justices belong to
everyone and so
you know it's just a it's a weird system
where we've lost that
moderating impulse of like well i'm
gonna take the best of this one and the
best of this one i'm gonna come together
with the solution that kind of pleases
everyone
and then we're going to make progress
from there
yeah so bringing it to something you
articulated incredibly well in lives of
the stoics you talk about this notion of
preferred indifference yeah and i
that to me was very compelling and that
they got into this argument of
and i i love this quote and i think this
quote is [__] profound which is
nothing is either good or bad but
thinking makes it makes it so
and and forgive me i forget some of the
the guys names but there was one guy who
was like no no
nothing is good or bad truly like don't
even waste time thinking about it
like and your life will be happier for
it whether you are sick whether you're
healthy
you're just indifferent to it all and it
becomes a sort of breaking point and you
you have this huge falling out in the
stoic camp over
like this idea of look there are some
things we just [__] prefer
like being healthy sure there are
moments where
being healthy could get you sent off to
war and so it would have been better to
be sick in that moment because then you
don't end up dying in war
yes but jesus like on balance you're
we all prefer to be healthy and that
that notion of like can we just [__]
decide
what we actually want because my thing
is this i'm not left or right
i am goal oriented so what the [__] is
our goal
like the moment we agree on what our
goal is now everybody's idea is just a
test
i'm running an experiment and does this
left experiment work does it right
experiment did it [__] move us closer
yes or no and if it doesn't i don't give
a [__] whose team it was whose idea it
was
i have a goal which i can [__]
articulate and we're now in a place
where i feel like
we can't even not only can we not agree
on the goal nobody's even attempting to
articulate
the goal i think i think that's right
and that that concept of preferred
indifference to me
encapsulates a really great problem in
philosophy and in
politics which is that we get so
convinced with like
extrapolating things out to their their
natural logic
that we end up in fantasyland
that's not good for anyone right so yeah
one of the early stokes was like
there is no good or bad it's all in our
heads uh or
or that only good is good and only bad
is bad and there's no gray area
and and you end up kind of in this
almost like religious
dogmatic point of view and that and and
seneca sort of cuts through this the the
this knot and he just goes like look
guys
it's probably better to be tall than
short most of the time
it's probably better to be rich than
poor most of the time
and he's saying that that's not he's
he's saying
i'm not saying if you're poor your life
sucks and you can't find happiness
um or that you can't do anything about
it he's just saying that generally this
is what we'll prefer
and and he's saying a stoic is going to
try to make the most good out of
whatever it's born you know like
he's saying like look like a stoic would
rather have both
eyes but if they lose one of their eyes
in battle
they're not going to be like life is
meaningless like i should you know
what's the use of continuing and so so
this idea of preferred indifference to
me is great it's like
look i i'm glad that i've been
successful
um but i'm i'm also and i'm gonna enjoy
the fruits of that while i can
but i'm also not going to become so
dependent on it
that um that uh
that the thought of losing it racks me
with anxiety
or makes me do unethical things in order
to maintain it so
the stoics are trying to get to a place
of sort of independence
and i think that's really important but
independence from what
independence from from externals right
so that like the happiness and when he's
saying preferred indifference
i think he's meaning like that that hey
if it
if it if you wake up today and it's
raining here's your plan for
a rainy day and if you wake up and it's
sunny and beautiful here's a plan for a
sunny day
but you don't wake up and the weather
determines the quality of your day
you know and and i think that that's a
thing a lot of people struggle with and
and i think politically look obviously
if you're if you lean uh right or left
you hope that your party is in power but
like
you should also get to a place where
you're like here's what the line is
right and so that i would much rather
have someone i disagree with like i
think about this in business like
look would you rather the ceo of the
company you work for
generally agree with your vision for the
company and
support exactly the direction that you
want to go yes
you also though you need to have someone
who's ethical
who's competent who's reliable you know
who who's who's you know um
does all the things you need in a leader
that are not really
political or directional in any way you
know what i mean like
i'm gonna jump in here and say that the
i think this is the first step on a
slippery slope to where we're at now
what i would say is going back to
everything should be an echo of your
goal
so i literally lived what you're talking
about in business where
i had ideas they ended up being bad
ideas it was very emotionally gratifying
to have my ideas be the one that the ceo
took and moved with
and then we hit a day where i knew i was
arguing for an idea that was bad but for
ego reasons i needed to be right i just
needed that
the the salve of like okay finally i'm
not stupid like i've got something
working for me
and even if it's just being able to win
the argument that alone made me feel
smart but there was a voice in my
screaming in the middle of my convincing
arguments
this will move you away from a
successful company and so i have this
moment of crisis around
what the [__] is my actual goal what do
i want right just be honest
don't [__] [__] this is a private
moment you and yourself
just be honest about what you actually
want so you can move through the world
in a way that actually moves you towards
your goals
and i realized i had these two competing
goals i wanted to feel smart meaning
even if i drive the company into the
ground
and then i wanted to be successful and
they they were actually coming into
competition and so i had to figure out
like a way to tease those out so that's
why
i don't think people need to they need
to be
very tense if they're saying to
themselves i would generally like
the country or the company to be run
with the people that see the world
my way you should want the people
running the country
that have the same goal and that
are accurate in their ability to assess
what's moving you towards that goal
now that i'll get behind all day left
right center
up down you know whatever the
qualifications of the ceo i don't give a
[__]
and this is why like in my own company
i'm always telling people i
will not i'm not capable i don't have
enough time and i'm not intelligent
enough to think of all
the right ideas to move this company
forward so i promise you one thing i'm a
slave
to what moves us towards our goal so
here's our goal it's both exciting and
honorable to get to your point about
virtues and all that
so this is something that uplifts not
only myself and you guys but humanity in
general
okay so it's exciting and it's honorable
now i'm gonna be
beholden to that so whoever's got the
right idea
if you think i'm doing something stupid
i want you to say the words i think this
is stupid don't try to be nice don't try
to be kind just [__] tell me the
truth
because now we can battle the ideas and
if we can think through them and not
have to
actually test it great if we can't then
and it seems plausible then we'll run
that test
now that may oh god i really hope like
that people
hear the distinction between those
because i'm not trying to split hairs
that to me is like
is is is the first step in a direction
either leaning into the i have my world
view
my world view is right and therefore i
want people to crystallize around my
world view and i'm gonna
vote for people that that are there
versus
what's your goal and who's going to help
actually get you towards that goal now
if you have a
pathologized goal that is [__]
sinister
or or ignorant and will actually lead to
our downfall and you just can't see it
that's a whole nother can of worms well
so so the stoics had this expression
character is fate and and so my point is
i'm saying obviously you want someone to
be aligned
with your goals but i would also be okay
being led by or working for someone who
maybe we actually do have different
goals is provided i get to do my sort of
basic thing
but what i'm never going to do or never
want to be in a position and i've been
in this position before
where you're working for someone who
actually maybe you do
share a goal but but fundamentally
they're
uh they're flawed as far as character
goes or
ethics go or they treat people poorly
or they have some vice or addiction or
or
flaw that it doesn't matter how talented
you
are it doesn't matter how good the goal
is or even how good the plan to get to
the goal is
eventually that person will destroy
themselves and you and the organization
and so
you know i think we see this in business
all the time and business is always less
loaded
you'll have the right company the right
vision
everything but they still fail why do
they fail it's because
some that there was something culturally
flawed in the organization that's
usually stemming from the leader so
i think what and this is something that
stoics talk about over and over and over
again that like
look at they're like the reason that
that a leader needs to study philosophy
is that philosophy
is about the development of character
and that no amount of
competence can make up for a deficiency
in character and whether you're looking
at
you know companies going into the
financial crisis or you're looking at
enron
or you're looking even at uber where
uber was
this great company but they'd sort of
created a win at all costs
culture that eventually meant that they
were sleeping on a sexual harassment
issue
and some legal issues and a whole bunch
of things that were eventually a ticking
time bomb
that ended up pushing the founder out of
the company and
you know wework's probably another great
example of this
you you have to ultimately think about
the
the the pathology of the person in
charge or if you are in charge
the pathology that's motivating you or
you know and this is why i wrote ego as
the enemy it again it doesn't matter how
brilliant you are how talented you are
how right you are
ego will eventually tear your team
organization
you know uh your your business apart
because it's fundamentally a a bad form
it's a corruptive
corrosive fuel and i think you know
even if the republicans or the democrats
bring this back to politics are right
if they're if they're pursuing a
strategy because its primary purpose is
to
wrestle power from the other side or to
dominate or to shove it down somebody's
throats
that's a that's a bad reason for doing a
good thing and it will eventually come
back to haunt them
if they're doing it because it
fundamentally helps the most people
then you know again i'd rather i'd
rather live under a regime
that's passing laws or policies that i
disagree with but i think are being done
for good reasons than
you know my fantasy country but that is
you know
a shield or a an excuse for some ominous
you know bad actor okay so this is
really [__] interesting
so um i am
way into this idea that philosophy is
about developing character
i think the character is absolutely
critical because
to me what you're pointing out with um
say
uber you've got somebody who's playing a
finite game versus an infinite game
so in a finite game there actually is a
finish line to cross and cool okay just
ignore the sexual harassment [__]
whatever huh we finally got across the
finish line and now we're good
versus if you realize this is an
infinite game this is something there is
no finish line there is only
like what are you trying to become what
does that journey look like
and all of us are you know lives will
get cut short before the sort of finish
line of
you know the universe dies a death you
know of there's no more
energy left in the system and it all
collapses down in itself um
so that like when if you make the
the right distinction of this is an
infinite game my goal is to
have character and by the way back to my
obsession about utility
to have character because in a group of
humans that is the thing that you need
to not wake up one day with a knife in
your [__] back and that when
when you're not just thinking about
yourself but you're thinking about other
people i think it actually is
critical that you also think about
yourself you're trying to empower
yourself
become a total [__] badass that's my
language i get that but like you're
trying to
make the most of yourself but all the
while not
doing it at the expense of the group and
if you do those things so you're
building character
through philosophy you are playing the
infinite game but you also are taking a
tremendous amount of personal
responsibility and saying like
the systems can't do this for me i must
do it for myself going back to your idea
of living in a democracy
you don't just get a roll up and be like
yo this democracy's rad glad i get to
take advantage of it it's like
you are part of the people by which the
government is able to
rule so getting getting in that
headspace
and then saying okay well if i've got
somebody that
is there so i'll point to mao's china
and and i will say i'm
i am at the edge of what i understand
and so nobody nobody need think that
they have to chastise me in order to get
me to dig farther into this
like this is a time stamp right of where
i'm at in in discovering all this going
back to
the whole culture wars and all that to
me was is the microbiome i'm just now
beginning to learn it even exists
and that i need to pay attention to it
because it actually has things in my
life but
i i will say that on paper like what
they were trying to do
sounded pretty cool like i get how
people go yeah
yeah like this should be how we should
approach things and yet
the the cultural revolution of mouth
china ended up killing
ungodly number of millions of people
right so
he may have killed them with the best of
intentions but like i still don't give
them a pass
i'm like of course it's one of those
things that you can just say certainly
now maybe he didn't have
the historical knowledge to be able to
say oh i get where this goes
it's like you you may not want to
extrapolate into candy land but you do
want to extrapolate enough to be like
where does this go even if i have good
intentions does this end somewhere well
no i mean look they as they say the road
the road to hell is paid with good
intentions and
and when you look at a lot of those
utopian experiments at the core
of them is one a fundamental denial of
what robert greene would call human
nature
right and a a violation of all the laws
of human nature
it's it's projecting uh an idea of the
world rather than reflecting back what
the world
is and and and then there is also a
stridency
and a certainty that that like you know
mao's china fails as as all totalitarian
regimes eventually fail
because um they
cannot brook dissent or
debate and they have to eradicate their
enemies
because you know they fundamentally
don't have an
answer for the enemies i i think to go
back to this idea of character and it's
i i'm really glad you compared it to an
infinite game i wrote that down
character is what you need for the
infinite game of life
and you know that if we look at like
religion like christianity christianity
is basically saying like
look you need to have good you need to
have good character you need to treat
people well don't sin don't do this and
that
and they're and they're saying this
basically they're like because jesus
says right they're saying like
if you don't you'll go to hell right and
that and
and that's a convincing argument right i
get that um
as someone uh who i think i i tend to
to focus more on the philosophical thing
so philosophy is sort of my guide
what the stoics are saying is they're
saying look character
and being a good person and and doing
all this
you're not doing it because there's some
reward at the end
you're doing it or a punishment at the
end they're saying
if you if you live without character
you will live in hell your life will
become a form of hell
and so i think that's something that we
don't talk about enough and
that's one of my the things i love about
marcus cereal is
you know here you have this guy with
absolute power and so he sort of he
suddenly becomes king and he kind of
looks around and
we have this idea absolute power
corrupts absolutely he's like
what what happened to all the people who
sat in this chair before me
why did they why did they become so evil
and bad and how did that happen and
and was it worth it you know was it
worth it to be alexander the great or
whomever
and he basically sort of realizes like
these guys weren't having a good time
that it wasn't
it's to be insatiable to have no
ethical bounds for for your behavior
to be entirely you know focused on the
self
to be obsessed and and validated only by
winning
you know to have no cause that you truly
are
committed to other than your own
advancement he basically is saying like
first off all these people died just
like everyone else
right and then he's saying actually it
was a miserable
lonely awful way to live and and so
i think we need to we the the reward for
virtue
is the virtuous life right like and and
the
the reward for vice you know hurt the
the they call this the sort of the
choice of hercules
the decision to take the easy road seems
easy but in the end it's actually the
worst
miserable most hard and difficult road
and
the the road of virtue is more
challenging
and there's less immediate rewards but
it's ultimately much more fulfilling
and and and peaceful and happy and and
and all of that so i think you know we
character is not just this thing you're
doing because
uh somebody said you should do it it's
it's something you're doing
it's the best strategy yeah so
i love that let's talk about being
insatiable let's talk about zeno you
open the book
um lives of the stoics with zeno and
it's a very interesting story and it
sums up
like the one person in the book maybe
that i resonated the most with was zeno
in that here you have this guy's very
successful and then he loses everything
and in a [__] shipwreck like it's
crazy like you realize this is some og
[__] they did not have insurance there
was no way to like easily get back in
the game
and so this guy goes from like riding
highs doing great and then poof it's all
gone
and now he's got a like one one of the
most and i imagine it would have been
even harder back then in the story you
tell about him i think it was him that
had to carry the lentil soup
and to like embarrass him because that's
what poor people ate and so that his
[__] teacher
made him like walk this whole city after
he's lost everything people are already
basically making fun of him for being
poor now
and now he's got to walk with like the
thing that just shows he's [__] poor
and he smashes the thing and he's got
you know this poor person soup all over
him and he's
literally shaking at least as as you
retell it and
and i thought okay this is [__]
interesting he has this
uh sort of epiphany of like okay i can't
invest in this
and i can invest in being a rich person
and the way that other people look at me
into your idea of independence and
breaking free of what other people think
so here's how i look at it now i have
chosen
to value greatness not saying other
people need to do it i'm just saying
it's something i have chosen to do
which in our the last time we talked we
differentiated between success
and greatness and i think success is
sort of personally defined
like whatever makes you feel the way you
want to feel that's success
greatness is like your name echoes
through the annals of history
right just people are so blown away by
what you accomplish it becomes like this
thing to aim at so anyway
i dig that i'm into it but that's my
like moment pre-shipwreck but the good
news is
i'm constantly having shipwrecks so i'm
striving towards this thing and i'm
building
up um you know whether it's a steam or
accolade or whatever
but it's inevitable that i i [__] up and
i do something wrong and now i bounce
back and i have truly embarrassed myself
and that's happened to me a thousand
times i mean maybe that's an
exaggeration but it happens so often
so anyway i think of these like i
probably think of them as
as two petals or maybe two buckets that
i can alternate between so i'm like i
want to be insatiable
i want to actually value myself on
pursuing greatness like
not at all costs because you're right i
always say i will do
anything within my code of ethics to
achieve my success now that within my
code of ethics thing is
critically important i think you would
translate that as character so
there's this i want to be a certain kind
of person chasing this [__] but every
time i fall
i go ah it's all good i don't value
myself for actually being that anyway
i only value the pursuit well so
here's what i would not push back on but
here's here's a way to think about it to
me
greatness is a very elastic flexible
idea
and and you know uh zeno may have been
great as a merchant and that may have
been what he was called to be great at
and he was
great at it in the moment and then
fortune intervenes and he loses
everything
and then he becomes greatness in another
form so epictetus who's
like you know all the stokes talk about
adversity but but epictetus is a slave
for 30 years and he's
horribly abused and he's broken and like
to be a slave in rome is like
you know you're you're as expendable as
expendable can be
and you know he has this line he says
the podium and a prison
are the same place and what he means is
that
the podium like where the emperor stands
or a senator stands and then a prison
they're both opportunities for greatness
right like so
so marcus aurelius is great because he
happens to find himself
the emperor of rome and he's great
because per his code of ethics
the power doesn't change him he fights
for the little guy you know he keeps
roam together
he heroically leads rome through the the
antonine plague which is a 15-year
pandemic
so on and so forth but epictetus is born
as
low as you can get in the roman empire
and his greatness is that
this does not break him there's a scene
where um
epictetus master grabs his leg and is
like basically torturing his slave just
for
just for the pure sadistic pleasure of
it and he's twisting the leg and he's
twisting the leg and epictetus just
looks him in the eye and he says
you're going to break my leg you're
going to break my leg
why are you doing this you're going to
break my leg and then finally
the leg snaps and he just looks him in
the eye and he says
i told you that was gonna happen like
that
is that is [__] human greatness at a
level that
is actually to me more impressive than
marcus aurelius leading uh you know the
troops in battle it's great because
it's purely self-contained and resolute
and unbreakable and unbeatable and and
so on and so forth so meaning i want you
to go deeper on that
meaning that he doesn't become emotional
about it it's it's
one he's he's complete master he's like
that monk lighting himself on fire to
to uh protest the vietnam war he's
transcended the limitations of his human
of his human form but i think more
importantly
what the only thing he's retained is his
sheer
defiance you know his his giant middle
finger at the institution of slavery
right like
this experience he walks he walks with a
limp for the rest of his life
this could have made him bitter he could
have committed suicide
you know he could have uh you know
become an addict
you know he could have he could have
done anything and instead
he perseveres through and he says you
know he's lameness or a
limp he says is an impediment to the
body but not to the spirit
and and so the the point is it's it's
it's epictetus is great
on the level of nelson mandela being
great in his prison cell
now nelson mandela also after prison
then becomes great
as a leader you know as a leader of a
nation
but but the idea for the stokes is that
you can be great anywhere in anything
and that greatness and excellent like
they would call this irritae
excellence is worth striving for it's
the only thing worth striving for
just you want to get to a place where
you don't
conflate excellence solely with
external accomplishments or fame or
money
which is what a lot of people do you
know what like like i'll give you
another a more modern example a few a
few years ago
they found that one of the actors on the
cosby show
had you know sort of bounced out of
acting and he was working at trader
joe's
and somebody snapped a picture of him
and they were sort of making fun of him
and but to me like the greatness of
being like well i can't be an actor
anymore i gotta provide for my family
i'm gonna [__] work
at trader joe's and i'm gonna do a good
job of it is
also greatness because it contains all
those same virtues that we're talking
about and so
i think when we're talking about being
indifferent
what we're talking about is being
indifferent to things that are not
in our control like you could have you
know you could have invented or
let's say you're a mathematician you
come up with some brilliant new theory
that fundamentally changes mathematics
um but you
die in obscurity and it's not until
after your death
that that that your genius was
discovered and appreciated
that doesn't to the stoic that doesn't
make you any more
or less great the greatness was the act
and the fact that society didn't
understand
is irrelevant i want to go back to
epictetus i clearly do not know
enough of his story um one i want to
know
i want to go a little bit further into
the
why it was great that his leg was broken
and trust me i
i agree with you i want to actually
articulate it um and this notion of
being able to transcend your emotions
and to not give in to them
not let them steer you and i know you
get pushed back on that
um is is that to you like the
when you say the podium and the prison
are the same
what is the element of greatness that
the stoics would say you can cultivate
is it the four
virtues is it so so
uh james stockdale admiral stockdale is
a fighter pilot in vietnam
he and he's shot down over vietnam he's
uh the highest ranking prisoner uh in
american prisoner
taken prison uh taken prisoner in in uh
the vietnam war and he had studied
epictetus in college that's he'd gone
back for a degree at stanford and he was
introduced
uh by his professor to epictetus and he
he had epictetus like in his bunk on the
ship
and and as he's parachuting down he's he
says to himself
i'm going to be in here for a long time
he says i'm entering the world of
epictetus
and what he meant is that he's leaving
the world yeah it's so it's it's an
incredible story one of the great heroes
of the 20th century
um and and he he's parachuting down and
he knows
that he's you know far removed from his
fighter jet he's far removed from the
great
powerful country that he's from he's far
removed from his family he's far removed
from
all the things that he'd accumulated in
his life up until this point
but he's saying i'm going down here and
there's going to be other soldiers and
my greatness my duty is going to be
surviving this ordeal
and doing the right thing inside this
ordeal and so
he's actually uh first off a little
interesting trivia i was talk i was
speaking to his son
not not long ago and his son was like
actually my dad
wasn't the highest ranking prisoner he
was the
the highest ranking prisoner who stepped
forward and assumed a leadership
role there were other prisoners that for
whatever reason
said i don't want to take that heat and
he took it right
and from from basically day one he
institutes sort of a culture of defiance
inside this prison
like for instance they they they sent
their their
they're gonna put him on national
television to
show that the prisoners are being uh uh
treated well inside this prison which is
not the case
right and so so they send him into this
bathroom they say look take a shower
here's a razor i want you to shave
and then uh we're gonna put you on
camera he walks into the bathroom and he
grabs the razor and he just cuts a giant
gash across his forehead
so he can't be used for propaganda
purposes um
and they come in and they're like oh my
god what have you done like you know
and and and so they go to get some
bandages and stuff and he realizes that
as hard as he tried they're probably
just going to be able to
to bandage his cut and put him on
television anyway so he grabs a stool
and he beats his own face in right and
and they come in and they say uh what
are we gonna tell the commander and he
says
you can tell the commander that i'm not
[__] going downtown
you know like and and so so this is this
is how this is basically you know he's
he's imprisoned he's shackled in irons
he's beaten he's tortured
at one point he realizes because he's
become kind of famous
you know because of his position there
that that they
that they can't afford to lose him right
that like
it would it would be bad for for the the
north vietnamese if something were to
happen to this pig
but they're still torturing the prisons
prisoners anyway so
uh one day he's he's he's his hands are
tied behind his back in this
in this room it's the only room with a
window in the prison
and uh you can see down below they're
torturing
other american troops and so he hobbles
over in the chair
you know like you can imagine him doing
this and he shatters the window
and he grabs the shards of glass and he
cuts his own wrists
knowing that uh he's basically saying
like
if you don't stop this i'm gonna kill
myself and you
and you're gonna have a world of hurt so
so what i'm trying to say is that
they're all for different forms of
greatness michael jordan has a form of
greatness
you know bill gates or warren buffett
have a form of greatness
elon musk has a form of greatness but
but at
there's also just the core resiliency
and determination
and unbreakable spirit of the
of the human race that's also a form of
greatness and the stoics
wanted us to know that that we are
descended
from those people too and that you know
like
seneca is this great line he says if
they can force you to do it
you don't know how to die and his point
was
jesus his point was that the tyrant
uh you know doesn't actually have any
control over you
right so so this but this is where the
stoics are complicated so seneca says
if you if they can force you to do
something you don't want to do
it's because you don't know how to die
right now that is that is [__]
badass that's like a movie badass right
and yet
seneca ends up working for several years
as nero's right-hand man one of the
horrendous tyrants of rome's you know
long history of horrendous tyrants and
so
again what the stoics present i think is
a
is an impossible ideal that that maybe
people manage to briefly touch for a few
minutes and
ultimately seneca does end up dying he
dies
loosely implicated in a conspiracy to
assassinate nero
but the point is it still
the greatness of seneca uh as a writer
to me is actually less impressive than
the other stoics
who resisted nero more courageously and
and and you know i would trade
all of seneca's beautiful writings
for just one or two of those anecdotes
of james stockdale in that prison camp
because you know that's
that's greatness indeed versus greatness
in in words is james stockdale still
alive
he's not he uh he died in i think 2005
or 2006.
he won the medal of honor i've been
lucky enough i've spoken at the
stockdale center at the
the naval academy but he is but so two
things i
i think you'll love so one he's one of
the great heroes of the
of the of the navy and of american
history
but uh you've if you remember why you've
heard of james stockdale
he's ross perot's running mate when ross
perot runs for
for president in 92 or whatever and
dennis miller has this great line so
so when when stockdale runs for vice
president
he's he does the debate and he doesn't
do really well in the debate he's not a
particularly photogenic guy he kind of
makes some gaffes here or there
and dennis miller talks about how sad it
is to go to your point about politics
um he's like look this guy was the first
guy into vietnam
the last guy out of vietnam he was
courageous
insensitive and brilliant and wise and
all these things
and he's like but he committed the one
unpardonable sin
of of our times which is that he was bad
on television
and so the the point is that i think
that true stoic greatness doesn't
translate as well so we don't hear about
it as much
but to me that's that's true human
greatness
jesus dude yes like that is
i now need to like really lean into
reading about him so
i read long walks of freedom nelson
mandela's book i've talked about it many
many times
and it was it's one of those moments
where
i can tell you right now this makes me
sad um
i'm not as hardcore as nelson mandela
i'm definitely not as hardcore
as james stockdale like that's i i
aspire to be and i'm not saying i i
forever accept that
but i know if i were uh
captured right now by somebody i don't
think that i would be able to
to smash my head into the glass slice my
wrists
just so that they'll leave other people
alone i'd heard the story about beating
himself with the chair
before um but man when you realize it as
sort of a pattern of behavior that this
guy was just
that [__] hardcore like and that is a
hardcore that i
aspire to that to me really like when
you tell me a story about him and then
you tell me a story about somebody that
has
business success like i am infinitely
more moved
by and i i consider it much harder like
if you said
hey you've got two people as close to
just sort of
middle of the road as you're ever going
to get you've got to make one into
a great business leader and or you have
to make one
into you know somebody that can be that
hardcore in a prison camp i give me the
business guy i'll try to make somebody
into a business person
all day like that [__] is so much easier
than having just the internal
fortitude to to suffer like that
well and and in case people think i'm
just some like you know crazy leftist
which i'm not i mean i live on a
ranch in texas so that should give you
some some sense of it but
like john mccain is in that same prison
camp as
as stockdale and and because he
because we saw mccain as a modern-day
politician
we forgot that he was also the
embodiment of human greatness
in that camp like people don't
understand so so john mccain's shot down
also goes into the prison camp
but his father was the theater commander
for the navy in the vietnam war so
imagine
if you're a prisoner of war uh
camp and you get the son of the guy
who's leading the like imagine what you
would do and so
so first off you can imagine they they
subject them to all sorts of torture and
horrible things
and then they then they decide a
different track and they say
um you're free to go home
they tell john mccain he can leave and
now the the armed forces have a very
strict protocol about prisoner of war
and it's it's uh uh first one in first
one out
so like uh there's no special treatment
for rank
or for fame or you know just because one
guy has kids doesn't mean he gets to go
home
before the guy that's been there longest
right and so they go to mccain and they
say you can go home
and and they're they're trying to let
him go home
to hammer in the point that uh
that vietnam was a was a rich man's war
but a poor man's fight they wanted to
embarrass
the the united states by saying like
look
they let this the the general's son go
home
because you know that's all they really
care about and so so they give mccain a
chance to go home
and and he says no so
so he stayed for seven years oh
w camp where he was tortured where he
permanently loses
the use of his arm uh where where he
undergoes all sorts of torture that
gives him ptsd
and you know uh that he very easily
could have died from
he doesn't see his family he did that
fall in
in a sense voluntarily because he would
not
exempt himself from the rules
or take special treatment because that
special treatment
would come at the expense of someone
else
and so again when and as it happens john
mccain wrote a book called
characteristic
the point is only someone of incredibly
strong
character could be able to go
you're giving me a get out of jail free
card literally
and i'm not gonna do it because that's
unfair to other people
and so again to me that's what greatness
is and it's
i i get really inspired talking about it
and then you
as you you as you said you have to have
the humility to go like wow i just
i don't think i could do that i don't i
don't think i'm there yet
but to me that's the kind of greatness
that we should be aspiring to
just as much is if not more of i would
love to sell a company for a hundred
million dollars do you know what i mean
like
we we celebrate almost the easier
superficial
successes and then these other things
you know we just we just don't even talk
about
oh man that is interesting why we don't
talk about it so the preferred
indifference thing is
is why like the reason i tell people no
matter how many billionaires commit
suicide there is a reason that people
will continue to pursue money
because money has it actually lets you
do something so it is a great
facilitator it has tremendous
value now it doesn't have the value that
people think it has which is that it
will make you feel differently about
yourself because you've obtained it
um you know and and part of the reason
that rich kids
end up so sort of emotionally um in a
dark place
is that you've been given something that
you didn't have to work for and there
are just innate psychological
ramifications of that
in fact one thing i want to talk about
is like what is human nature
and i would say the the
doing hard things to achieve something
that matters
so self-worth to me is predicated on
doing something you believe is worthy
and if you don't do something you
believe is worthy you will never have
self-worth nobody can
love you to self-worth you can never
earn your way to self-worth financially
you you can only earn your way to
self-worth by doing something that you
think is worthy which almost always is
born out of doing some really hard [__]
and so that like that idea of
this is what we should be aspiring
towards i'm with you a thousand percent
because
it lines up more than any other kind of
success it lines up with
human nature with what you have an
intrinsic program to value
now the question is why don't we talk
about it
and i'm gonna guess part of the reason
that we don't talk about it is
it isn't sexy it's making you look at
something that's hard and gnarly
and i think like me i if i look at that
i come up wanting i come up wishing i
were that
badass i come up having to confront that
i'm not that badass yet
and that is probably deeply
uncomfortable do you think there's
something else at play as to why we
don't celebrate that
yeah i i think i think the big reason is
that
it's it's sincere and it's
it feels a little cheesy and a little
lame
to to be like i was just writing about
this there's this great
uh doris kearns goodwin who who uh
biographized theodore roosevelt she says
you know
uh theodore roosevelt was the kind of
kid
that grew up reading books about you
know the great men of history
and decided he would be just like them
and when she says that i detect a little
bit of a sneer
like a little bit of some condescension
do you know what i mean like it's like
it's like believing in fairy tales right
and and so i think we've we're a society
that's that's ironic
you know we're a society that's
sarcastic and cynical
and we're not a society that like the
ancient
unlike the ancients that celebrates
those
heroes right like even now when we look
at history and look i agree
there are things in history that need to
be pointed out inescapable facts and
tragedies and and and inexcusable
occurrences
but we look at history primarily today
to talk about how shitty everyone was
that this person was a racist this
person was a slave owner
you know this person you know didn't
take care of their workers and you know
we we look through history almost
exclusively to judge
the past by the present and and to
almost tell ourselves this
narrative about how crappy
we've been to each other for a long time
and
it didn't always used to be that way i
mean people people recited the odyssey
because odysseus is the hero right and
they
and they they told the the stories of
the 300 spartans and
and all they told themselves these
stories because
um that's just that that's how they
passed on these lessons to the next
generation and
i mean i see all the superheroes behind
you but it's like we now own
like superheroes are the only characters
art or entertainment that are heroic
you know what i mean everyone else is is
your don drapers or your
you know everyone else is this sort of
twisted
dark bad brooding you know anti-hero
we i think we've lost the ability to be
like this is what greatness looks like
this is what every man like just because
the heroes were all male
in the past doesn't mean that that
men and women can't be can't aspire to
be
like churchill during the second world
war just because
churchill was also wrong about india
about women's rights
you know about all sorts of other things
doesn't mean that he wasn't
great in that moment you know the the
vietnam war was a war that probably
never should have been fought but that
doesn't mean that stockdale and mccain
weren't
great in the instance that they in the
moment that they found themselves in so
to me a big part of it is we're just so
damn cynical
that we don't talk about heroes and we
don't talk about
greatness and then we wonder why people
don't have it
yeah man that that is i think a very um
decisive very insightful breakdown of
why we look away from that um that's
what i try to do in my books but like
what i what inspi what gets me excited
is writing stories about these people i
feel like i get to have a conversation
with them and i get to live in their
in that moment of greatness a little bit
and i'm not saying i'm ever going to be
in a situation like they are
but it does help me you know if i'm
deciding
between this or that am i going to say
something you know go to your point
earlier am i
going to keep my mouth shut for business
reasons whatever it is
these examples you know forged in much
more
severe circumstances help you go
like i was i was writing about this this
morning like there's this anne frank
quote about hope
and courage and i was just like if this
little girl
could be courageous living in an attic
hiding out from the nazis who in a
matter of months are going to break in
and murder her that's what happens
if she can have hope what [__] excuse
do
i have to be jaded and cynical because
you know i think uh i think the world is
going to pieces do you know what i mean
i think
we draw these examples really do make a
difference if you let them
yeah cynicism is something i didn't
realize was an actual school of thought
and i want to cover that in a minute
um don't let me forget all right but
thank you but there is another idea when
you were talking you talk about you know
um one that we're trying to it's almost
like this desire to erase history which
i don't fully
i can articulate to you the motives that
people are using but i don't understand
the emotional impulse that people have
and i just haven't thought enough about
it
but seems very unwise you
i've either heard you say or you quoted
in the book i can no longer remember
which
this notion of i think it was seneca or
one of the stoic philosophers says you
know i will quote a sentence from a bad
writer
if he has something profound to say um
and i think that that
that is very wise like instead of
looking for reasons to rule people out
look for do they have some nugget of
wisdom that you can glean that will
actually help you with something
but then you also said something about
um you know most of the heroes are men
have you read soldier soldier nitzin's
book
the gulag archipelago duty says
something in there something tells me
that um if you dive into that period of
history in russia
that what may come to the forefront is
a certain thing that women have that i
find really fascinating when she said
that the people who ended up dying for
their beliefs
that that wouldn't just finally hit a
point where they'd be like
yes fine like i i denounced them and
and they're full of [__] he was like the
only people that would just keep going
and going and going
saying no i will not i will not i will
not until they're dead was women
and there was this sense of like there
there is a
and look these are distributions so of
course there are going to be guys that
are willing to do that but like as you
go to the extremes
and you start looking at you know in
these crazy scenarios it just like
most of the violent offenders in prison
are men does not mean that there aren't
violent female offenders it just means
you look at overlapping graphs
overlapping graphs as you get to the
extremes then you get sort of that tail
so anyway that my gut is there's a
a a thing that happens around like i
won't relent i won't give up i won't
something that women have and i see it
in my wife so
it's one of those things where i'm like
my wife actually like
i think i'm pretty [__] hardcore but
there is some
band of thing where like my wife just
leaves me in
awe of like where she just isn't going
to back down like it's it's
pretty inspiring no it's it's super
inspiring and so one of the things that
i was really
intent on in the book is that this i
would not let the book be
100 men it's it's about ancient stoics
so of course the vast majority of the
characters are men that's
that's that's not because men are
superior that only men were allowed
in many cases to do a lot of these
things but cato who's one of the sort of
towering stoics
decides to teach his daughter philosophy
which is
you know a pretty transgressive thing at
the turn of the
of the of the millennium and and so
she becomes just as stoic as he is and
and so
for people who are familiar with the
story of the assassination of julius
caesar
you know you think brutus uh you know
you think the senators
you don't realize that actually uh
brutus wife is porsha
cato's daughter and that she was the
steel backbone
behind the whole thing so so brutus is
kind of
thinking about you know he's thinking he
knows you know caesar's a tyrant he's
destroyed the republic he's a dictator
he knows he wants to do something and
he's thinking about it
and his wife just like my wife and i'm
sure your wife she just senses
that something is going on that he's not
telling her
and she realizes that he's probably
has a secret that he's afraid if she
knows
uh not that she'll tell but that
in rome uh if there was a conspiracy
uh anyone who was suspected to be
involved would be subjected to extreme
torture to uh to confess and so
she realizes that what he doubts is her
ability to withstand
torture which of course is absurd
because anyone uh
who has seen a woman go through
childbirth understands that
women are like 500 times stronger than
men
and can endure like like if men gave
birth
every man would get an epidural like two
seconds after you walk
into the hospital do you know what i
mean like no man would ever give birth
naturally uh
it would it would not even be a question
right um
so so anyways she realizes that he
doubts her and so what she does
and she realizes like actually i don't
know how i would
stand up under torture so she stabs
herself
in the leg with a knife and then with a
pen knife
and then she says i'm going to see how
long i can just take the pain
and so she does this she hours and hours
she just sits there and endures like a
gaping leg wound
and then when her husband comes home she
caught she's like look at this
you know i she's like if you think she's
like is it not enough
that i'm cato's daughter is it not
enough that i'm your wife
is it not enough that i have proven to
you that i can withstand
the worst pain imaginable that you would
not tell me and
and he does tell he not only does he
tell her but in shakespeare's play about
it
you know he says something like now i
have to live
up to my wife's courage you know like he
has to he realizes that
you know she's stronger than he is and
so yeah we have
like we have this sense of like history
being all these
big you know strong men doing this this
and this
and in a way the more i think about it
it's actually it's the women who are
more stoic because
not only did they endure most of the
same adversity and difficulty and loss
but uh but they didn't demand any credit
or attention
you know like you know what i mean like
to me the most stoic thing of all
is just to is to quietly endure
you know pain and difficulty and not let
anyone see you sweat
you know and and so there i think
there's this element where
we've we've misunderstood the absence of
women
from a lot of the historical events like
sure uh you know pioneers crossed you
know the american west
but the whole family it was a whole
family affair
you know what i mean and just because uh
we've heard the names of
this man or you know this this other one
it doesn't mean that there wasn't
someone else sitting in the wagon right
next to him
dude we're we're about to go into a
really
interesting time we're already in the
thick of it so
growing up with the notion of behind
every great man is a great woman
and that that was to be celebrated and
that there wasn't a big push
you know for women to step out front but
now there is right now there's the
i bought it myself and i control my own
destiny
and i am very curious to see what
happens
to men as that dynamic begins to break
down because i will speak from my own
experience
that i would not be the man that i am
today without lisa
and i say that not and like somebody
wants to say something nice about their
wife
i say it in that my wife was like yo
[__] you said you were going to
do something with your life
hop to it and not in a mean way and she
always gets very defensive when i
i categorize it like that um but she was
obviously loving and warm and that was
what drew me to her but she didn't [__]
around and so i'll give you
i'll give you the lamest example ever
there was a moment where
i was eating less than i'd ever eaten in
my life and i was getting fat
and i was very frustrated because this
was a low fat thing so i cut fat out and
of course you replace it with sugar
and so and that was like all the hype
and the craze and that's what everybody
said you should be doing
and so i'm now going in the wrong
direction i come from a morbidly obese
family and so i'm like getting real
paranoid that i'm you know headed in a
bad direction and i'm like [__]
my genetics have just given up like this
is my fate but i was really unhappy
about it i discovered low carb and i'm
like oh
maybe this is the answer i just need to
cut out carbs now
for anybody that's gone from a low fat
high sugar diet
to a what i did was basically high
protein
low fat no sugar it is brutal
you go through a period of headaches and
like all this stuff
and i went to my wife one day and i was
angry about the fact that this was such
a hard transition
and i was like if i had a cookie i would
just feel better
and she was basically like
it is the way it is so you're gonna keep
whining about it are you gonna see this
root you said you wanted to do it
what do you want me to do right now you
want me to be like boohoo and cry with
you
or are you going to recognize on the
other side of this headache is the thing
that you
seek now my wife did that a thousand
different times
all these moments of weakness where she
helped me become the person that i
wanted to become that i professed i was
attempting to become but it was she
would kick me in the ass when what i
needed was a kick in the ass
and so she and i went through this
period where
she was finding her greatness through me
by helping me become the person that i
wanted to be she didn't have any
interest in going out into the world to
do that she thought she was going to be
a mother
and like she was good with that and she
was going to pursue her art but she
wasn't trying to
you know sort of be out in the world and
be an entrepreneur sure
but then we flip and now 10 years into
our marriage she decides she does want
to become an entrepreneur
she does want to step forward she does
want to go on that journey
um by herself and i think [__] what if
she had been running her own race when i
was trying to become something and i
didn't have somebody to
that that i wanted to sleep with quite
frankly that
i had all this like you know i had every
reason you can imagine
to want her to find me powerful and
attractive
and sexy and so [__] you better do the
work to become someone worthy
of her attraction and that was a huge
thing for me
and now if women aren't playing that
role i'm not saying that they should
have to
like i told my wife i am here to help
make sure you have whatever life
you want i will give whatever up i need
to to make sure that you can become the
person you want to become
but i think there are going to be
consequences i think there will be
consequences but
in a sense like i think it just means
it's it's more on
the individual so like this is something
i've never really understood by a lot of
these
like you get these sort of alt-righty
figures who are like you know
like uh you know now there's women in
the workplace and
and then they're there there's all these
different races and it's not fair and
it's like dude people actually say that
[__]
yeah what what what i'm saying you get
what you what i think you're seeing
politically is a resentment
like it's like when you're used to what
they say is like uh
when you're used to privilege equality
feels like a punishment right it feels
like you're losing something
right and you don't real like you think
like go
go back 50 years if you're a white
person in this country
you have 15 to 30
less let's just say 15 to
50 percent less competition right it's
like if women are kept out of certain
industries
or if black people are kept out of
certain industries or if you know
did different there's less competition
like why is college harder to get into
now
it's because it's a global competition
now people from china are trying to get
into harvard too
and their smart kids might be smarter
than you right and
and uh and and uh and so so what what
we're existing in now is a world of a
lot more competition
right like where everyone has an equal
shot
suddenly the meritocracy is not so fun
because if you don't have what it takes
you don't have what it takes right and
so
when i see people you know you see some
someone every once in a while express
one of these kind of regressive beliefs
and and what i see in those beliefs is
fear
as fear of not being able to cut it
right like
like uh you know those those protesters
at chancellorsville or whatever who were
like
uh charlottesville who were like they
will not replace us
i'm not worried about getting [__]
replaced because i know i can cut it and
if you tell me that hey
this was okay 20 years ago and that was
the rules everyone was playing by
um and now the rules are this i'm gonna
adjust
you know what i mean like all the like
you you hear these old guys who are like
you used to be able to tell a woman this
or you used to be able to make these
kind of jokes at the office and now you
can't it's like
you you are the one that sounds like a
little [__]
you know what i mean like you are the
one that sounds like you cannot adjust
to changing realities or changing
like like i think i guess what i'm
saying is what i'm not afraid of and i
think what is at the core of a lot of
uh people's fears is a fear of change
and the reality is sure yeah society is
changing that
the the women used to not have a lot of
options and now they have a lot of
options and that changes things and
that's going to require people i think
to adjust and there there's going to be
pros and cons i'm sure
but i think if you really have what it
takes
you're gonna find a way to thrive in
this environment just it's like
it's like they change the rules in
football uh do you quit
or do you go oh okay this is what a pass
interference looks like
now and uh i'm not gonna do that when
i'm defending a wide receiver
like to me it's not that complicated but
i think again
what stoicism is is about look i don't
control that so i accept it
i come to terms with it and by the way
in this case obviously very much agree
with it
but it's like i i don't control it i'm
going to accept it i'm going to make the
most of it
because that's what our job in life is
to do
all right you want to you ready to take
this somewhere dangerous all right let's
do it
once we're we just were somewhere pretty
dangerous
we walked up next to the third rail now
we're gonna like grab a hold of it and
lick it a little
um so the everything that you just said
i'm totally on board with and i think
you're right it's
fear of change it's people don't think
that they can cut it
um it's also they have the wrong value
system in my opinion because they value
themselves for being something for
ranking in a certain order
instead of sincerely pursuing something
because look i don't
if i were going to play basketball i
would say my pursuit is to be the
greatest of all time
and i'm pretty sure that physically i
just don't have what it's
like you're you're only able to build on
something right so my favorite quote
uh you're not able to make a racehorse
out of a pig but you can make a really
fast pig
so but if i'm trying to become a really
fast pig i i think only that i'm going
to become the greatest racehorse of all
time
and i know in that effort i will
probably top out at a fast pick
so you've got that idea and i think
people should think more like that and
not value themselves for whether or not
they become the greatest and then also
to further complicate issues if i felt
that i was the best at something and
somebody whispered in my ear you're only
the best at this because you're not
letting some people play
all the emotional wind that i felt from
being good would evaporate
and so to me the goal of life is how you
feel about yourself and you're by
yourself so even if i'm in the number
one position but everybody knows there's
somebody better that i'm just not
letting play
i wouldn't feel good about that so what
the [__] this is the point
all right so the real dangerous thing is
as
we look at um okay all these new people
are coming into the space and we should
be giving everybody equal opportunity
i hear people saying basically out they
don't use these words but this is
definitely the sentiment
which is you know there's calls for
white men to give up their jobs so a
woman or a person of color can come in
and have that opportunity
and that's where i'm like [__] that
like one thing i used to say in business
was never ever
ever ever say slow down so i can lead
so i love it bring every [__]
into this game
let's make sure everybody has equal
opportunity meaning
that you don't hobble them with a
[__] [__] education
like get these [__] literally
the thing i'm focused on
is making sure no matter where you live
that your zip code does not determine
your success so i am somebody putting my
money where my [__] mouth is
about making sure everybody steps to
that starting line ready to [__] rock
nobody's been hobbled
so but my thing is i love that [__] i
look around yeah
i'm so [__] excited you guys are all
here we're gonna go [__] hard for
this cake but i'm gonna go hard too
and if you can beat me [__] yeah i'm
never gonna throw a banana peel and try
to slip you up
and if i come in last i come in last
like cool i will then flip my mind in a
very stoked fashion to being like at
least i get to live in a world with all
these rad [__] people
so i'm totally cool with that but i'm
gonna play [__] hard
and i would want everybody else to be in
like a fun way like we're
going for this right no no i i agree
look
uh chrysippus is one of the early stoics
and and
one of the the ones who we know the most
about his athletic pursuits
so he's a he's a distance runner but
they he he ran in this uh
insane distance race they would do
it was a state i think the the distance
was called the stadia
and you know which is i don't know it
was like 200 yards or 300 yards
they would do like a five or six mile
race of
300 yard wind sprints basically so
they'd run to one in touch back like
this
so imagine running five miles of wind
sprints it'd be an incredible endurance
sport
and you're doing it with other athletes
right and so
so um again what i love about the stokes
is that they weren't these like guys in
robes just kicking around ideas they
they were runners and wrestlers and
generals and and
and politicians and so they knew about
competition and knew about fighting and
and he talked he's like look when you're
in a race
you want to do everything you
desperately want to win
and you're willing to do anything and
everything to win and it's honorable to
do that in so far
as you never negatively impact
someone else unfairly so he calls
they call this the no shoving principle
so you can say whatever you want to
psych someone out
you could engage in some philos you know
some strategy where you're
you're sandbagging it first and then you
put on the gas or you know you could do
whatever it takes to win
but you can't push someone over right
and i think
um look the reality is we've had a
system for a long time
that whether we knew it or not whether
you and i engaged in it or not
was predicated on people being pushed
over like i
i've talked about this on another
podcast it was like my my grandmother
uh grew my yeah my grandmother and my
father's side grew up in arkansas
so you know she went to high school then
she went to college
uh great but and and i met her and
you know my parents would talk about her
she died when i was very young but it's
like
never did anyone say did ever did anyone
in my family go
you know grandma's high school was
segregated black people were not allowed
to go to the high school
and they and if they'd applied to go to
if they'd attempted to uh attend uh
college with her they would have been
murdered right like would you watch the
the the the video of those first
african-americans trying to go to
college in the south in
the 1960s well my grandmother went to
college in the 40s so
like never did this come up so i think
one of the things we've not done a good
job of wrapping our head around
is just how real and how recent the
shoving
in the system was right so i agree
i think it should be an even playing
field everyone should compete
uh and and you know the let the let the
winner uh be the winner
it's it's a little hard obviously to go
hey i'm not shoving anyone
uh it's not fair you know it's not fair
for you to say i have an unfair
advantage when your ancestors have been
shoving
every single person up until you know
like 10 minutes ago
and then you're like well it's a totally
fair thing so i think we can
i think it's perfectly and again let's
talk about moderation
i think it's perfectly reasonable to go
like hey the system's been unfair for a
long time
we have to acknowledge that here are the
steps we're taking to
rectify or make amends for some of the
abuses of the past and here's what we're
gonna do to
ensure an even and level playing field
going forward
may the best man woman race
whatever win and and so i think i don't
think those are mutually exclusive
points
but people try to simplify it and make
make sure that it is do you know what i
mean
yeah i had a guy named vuci tempacueo on
the show
um south african black guy and
grew up in apartheid and talking about
like
all right [__] now what like
now there is no apartheid and
you ultimately stop looking to the
system
to like you know equal everything out so
that everybody's equal
he was like you now are able to enter
this race
become a badass like that is your only
option
and my thing is goal right
you have this goal of you want everybody
well i'll say
i have a goal where i want everybody to
have equal opportunity don't [__] up
their education no shoving all that [__]
but now i expect these [__] to
roll up and shine because i know they
can
and that's my thing like when i see
people the road to hell is pay for good
intentions
they want to like help everybody
mollycoddle all that and never
make demands like if you're going to
help somebody you give them the bowl of
soup you [__] break it you cover them
in the soup and you make them
march through town so that they get
[__] tough so they know like
how to proceed and get better and do
their thing
and that because ultimately that is what
a human must do
is go inward find the internal fortitude
build the skill set
so they can go and [__] dominate now
it is always this is why you need that
friction
there's always the but some people are
not going to thrive and what the [__] do
you do
with that and i would say you want
systems that
take care of them and you don't want to
leave people um dying in the streets but
at the same time you don't want to try
to get
a quality of outcome which becomes
tyrannical basically
no i mean i think there's an expression
i forget who said it but they sort of
called it the soft
bigotry of low expectations and i i
think that's
that's certainly real um at the same
time
uh when you look at the numbers and you
go okay why
is the uh why does the average black
family have a lower
you know net worth than an average white
family well a lot these things are
hereditary and they're built up over
generations so you
when you say hereditary what do you mean
that makes me think what i'm saying is
that
you know my father uh started at a level
higher up that like
uh if you look at black people in the
united states the vast majority of
african americans would have started you
know as
equal citizens not even after the civil
war
but like legally could not vote until
1965 right so the idea that
that that uh like um the to go to this
point uh ruby bridges
who was the in that famous painting and
photograph the first
uh uh black little girl to go to school
and i forget what state
she's like 65 right now do you know what
i mean like
like could not go to school a regular
elementary school
you know properly budgeted with good
teachers
working systems she's in her 60s right
so this is all very very recent
and so the point is obviously like what
what advantages she inherited
financially
and just as far as like my parents went
to college
their parents went to college my i don't
know if my great-grandparents went to
college but the point is
here's a great example my grandfather
fought in world war ii and came home and
got access to
uh the gi bill to go to college and he
fha loans and all sorts of things that
the same
black veterans in the same war did not
get
so if you were to compare me his
grandson to a random person
of a different race in a different city
with very similar
uh you know arc one would have a greater
financial and
cultural advantage than the other right
so my point is
those things exist and you can't deny
that they don't exist and you can't
pretend
that it's a perfectly even playing field
so so i think you can you can uh
stipulate
all that and then say still
the situation is the situation the
stoics would say you don't control
what's happened
but you control what you're gonna do
about it it wasn't fair that jackie
robinson was
up against all these other advantages uh
disadvantages as a
as a player i think jackie robinson was
hit by like 60 pitches
for instance in his major league career
but he still
chose to comport himself with
self-control
and dignity and most of all he [__]
shoved it in their faces by being
one of the greatest baseball players of
all time so i i think
it it's possible to again hold two
semi-contradictory ideas
in your head at the same time which is
that the system has been
uh systematically unfair for generations
and that's created real
deficits and disadvantages and
each of us wakes up today in the world
and we're forced to figure out how to
make the most of
the situation and and i think it's
important to also stipulate
race and uh gender are not the only
disadvantages that people get in life
like
you were saying you come from a family
of uh
of obese people that was a real obstacle
that you
not only had to struggle with but you
know learned
patterns and and behaviors from that
you're
we're all dealing with [__] and i think
at the core of it we have to decide
are we going to be defined by it or are
we going to
transcend it and be made better for what
we've what we've
you know experienced yeah i like what
you're saying there in that
i was once asked by i was doing a talk
at google and a black guy asked me
hey tom do you think that things are and
this is years ago do you think that
things are harder for me
because i'm african-american and i said
almost certainly yes
like even just just look at the math of
the situation so you live in
in a majority white country and the
one of the imperatives of the human mind
is to seek out
um things to categorize as us and them
one of the most
obvious and apparent is just physical
appearance and so
you it's what i call the school of fish
phenomena you always see
fish with the same type of fish right
and they swim in all these
schools and and that's just that so
inevitably you're going to have
the sort of soft like oh it is
immediately
apparent just on like a glance i don't
know you or anything about you and so
i'll
sort of automatically categorize you
into you're not like me now it doesn't
mean that the person automatically has
hatred or anything like that
but that just being in a country where
you're not the majority is already going
to be difficult
sure so my question to him was and now
what so
you have a system that's working against
you let's just say
like i'm perfectly willing to say that
either
for the historical reasons that you very
clearly laid out it's very clear that
things are
against you if um what you inherit from
your family
matters a lot to the success that you
will have in your own life
then you're clearly at a deficit because
you don't have to go back very far like
you said to run into
one of your real near ancestors was
going to have been completely hobbled
now i'll i'll argue that t-shirt to
t-shirt and three generations is
something to consider
in that most most families are not
passing on
financial legacy in the way that people
think they do
now i do think they pass on a mindset
and the mindset to me becomes far more
interesting
than the amount of wealth my parents did
not pass on on any wealth to me
but they made sure that i got educated
so that's big so to me like making sure
people get educated is critically
important
but going back to this question he was
asked and i said yes for sure there are
things that are working against you
but now what now what he can control is
he gets to
you know in the a very stoic response he
gets to decide how he reacts to that he
can't control
the way the world is it's too
multi-factorial but he can
control how he responds and so to me
like
that that is a moment of excitement it's
a moment of excitement to me that no
matter how much
kobe bryant said booze don't block dunks
so i'll say
racism doesn't block success right you
can get
so good look at booker t washington who
is becoming i don't understand this
i i really don't and maybe there's an
argument that i'm just ignorant to but
i think it was obama that said like
don't put me in that booker t washington
camp of like pick yourself up by your
bootstraps
but booker t washington was a [__]
slave and ended up building a school
that still lives on today he that's oh
[__] amazing
and so if it couldn't stop him like
there there just
is it the human ability to change and
grow
can reach a level where you are so good
at something that people can't stop you
even when they want to
now i'm i'm talking in a world where
you're not getting shot or lynched or
like all that [__] is real i'm not
trying to diminish any of that i'm just
looking at today
we've gotten from a legislative
standpoint i am unaware of any
racist laws they may be there and again
maybe this is ignorance
but like it feels like from a
legislative standpoint we've said okay
we're we now have a a
sort of basin in which to play that is
colorblind possibly even now beginning
to spill in the opposite direction
you have been historically hobbled
depending on how much that feeds into
your abilities right now today
but you still get to own how you come at
the world
and to me like that should be exciting
like people should be like okay cool
it may be harder for me but it is still
possible for me to do red [__]
i i'm i'm fascinated by booker t
washington i have his
uh right here i have uh
up from slavery right here it's one of
my favorite books he's a hero of mine
uh but the knock against booker t
washington
is and it's an interesting one so booker
t washington this is this is
uh early 1900's late 1800's early 1900's
it's sort of post reconstruction he's
basically saying
look um
the way he's basically saying like look
the world is so racist
and so [__] up that the only
the only way that he's basically saying
look black people have to earn
their respect and their rights right so
that the knock if you look back on it
you're sort of going
well you were accepting a status quo
that
that perhaps legislatively should have
never existed right he's basically
saying like look
he's like black people we don't need to
worry about education uh although
obviously
the tuskegee institute but he's saying
we need to we need to focus on like
learning how to farm and learning how to
build things
because that's the only way we can prove
our worth to society
which i understand was a very pragmatic
take the argument is just sort of like
um well you should have never had to be
in that position
to begin with right and this is like the
most stoked moment ever
agreed and i won't even say like maybe
it never should have been
it never should have been it's [__]
grotesque it's one of the gnarliest
things to look back on is like
how gross humans can be with the
like how long slavery lasted in all
cultures ah it's
but this is the tension of stoicism this
is one of the knocks right so
when does your individual acceptance of
adversity difficulty uh [__] up status
quo
become uh resigning your
the society's collective agency over
that problem so epictetus right
a slave he accepts the slavery he he
does
basically in rome you could be you were
a slave for 30 years and then you're
freed so he does his 30-year bid
and comes out but even in epictetus is
writing
he never questions the institution the
institution of slavery
none of the stoics really do ever say
like they sort of go this is gross it
shouldn't happen
but they they never say slavery is wrong
and if we all come together we can do
something about it so
so the knock on stoicism is that it's
it's somehow resigned
that the stoics because we focus like
what you're talking about is the
individual's response to a [__] up
situation how
hey hey here's all these disadvantages
uh and i by
by the way i just read a book about
someone you would love a guy named major
taylor
who is the greatest bicycle racer in
american history
he's a black guy in the late 1800s
better than lance armstrong better than
jackie robinson better than jack johnson
an incredible athlete
worthy of study we've sort of forgotten
about him but but the point is
at what point does just going this is
the [__] up rig game
i'm gonna figure out how to how to
participate in myself
limit our ability to come together as a
society to
fix an injustice or a change right and
so what i try to write a lot about
is is understanding that that's not
actually what stoicism is about
there were stoics who were who were
engaged in in revolutions in rome
cato bands together a bunch of stoics
and tries to resist julius caesar
there's a there's a translator of
epictetus who leads a black regiment in
the
in the in for the union cause in the
civil war uh toussaint le ventura
uh the the revolutionary in haiti who
defies napoleon
uh is is a is a is a black reader of
epictetus
but the american founders thomas
jefferson and and george washington and
benjamin franklin and john adams
it was stoicism that inspired these guys
to come together
and say we can start a new nation we can
change
this and so i think it's important like
this the tension is when does an
individual
resigning themselves to facts out of
their control
become complicit in the propagation of
the status quo
when if everyone got together and said
collectively we have power and could
change it so that's kind of that i think
is an important tension it kind of
brings us back to where we begin
you can't just say hey this police
brutality issue
is [__] up and it has all these
different causes
and no one individual can make a
difference that's
that's history proves us wrong an
individual can create
change but an individual has to has to
try to make change and obviously has to
bring other people on board with them so
you know i think that that's an
important thing that that
i think in our this time of cynicism and
pessimism that we don't
we don't lose sight of all right so i
have a
direct idea um on that so
the here's and this was going back to
that guy that had asked me the question
at the google talk
it's exactly what i said to him is some
people are called
to fight the system and that's there and
i use
called specifically like there's
something in them that compels them that
that is the way
in their life the things that light them
up to give them more energy
that make it worth it for them that they
feel called in that way and i'm very
grateful that they exist and for anybody
that feels called
to address the the system amazing
um there is another side of that coin
though and i want people to understand
that i
very much doubt if you sat down with
booker t washington he's not going to be
like
not complicit to this i look at the
problem the state of the world and i say
given the things that light me on fire
and what i'm capable of doing and how do
i think that i can
do this is i'm going to you've got
people that are now legally free but
they don't have a skill set that allows
them to control their own lives to hold
dominion over themselves and their
family and by giving them those skills
they can't be re-subjugated and so i
could give you a fiery speech about how
that is as important if not more
important in fact
if every single person suddenly became
like
our our man in the concentration camp
how the [__] would you ever enslave them
is
never going to happen they're never
going to go backwards because there is
nothing they won't endure
when you come at them personally like
[__] it they they will just
go all the way there's no point in and
going back to
the gulag archipelago as he said every
time you turned a blind eye you didn't
say something you didn't stand up for
yourself
you thought let me just keep my head
down that was the problem it wasn't just
the system
of like this government came into
control it said nobody said [__] off
you just snatched timmy out of his bed
in the middle of the [__] night with
no explanation
and then you snatch me but if then
sally's like you [__] took tom and
timmy what the [__] is going on
and then when sally gets snatched
somebody else speaks up suddenly you you
realize oh [__] like we actually can't
do this
so you've got people that are called to
the to address the system
i'm so grateful they exist and then you
have people that are personal
responsibility on that side they're like
if you get good enough
people cannot [__] take advantage of
you it's that simple and if you look at
what jay-z has done
literally like 20 years ago maybe more
he realized i have to own the masters to
my own music
and so he went on a quest to get it he
ends up getting the masters through his
own music and it's no surprise that he's
as freakishly successful as he is
because he knows how to think within the
system
he doesn't go in and say oh i'm going to
try to tear down the entire
music system he's not posting tweets of
the contract that he has
he just [__] says okay cool to win in
the system i need to own the masters i'm
going to go on the masters he gets the
masters and to me it's like
not only does it show other people what
you can do but it puts him
in this incredible position of personal
power
and my thing is just don't ever leave
that chip on the table
if you have an insight into the system
don't leave that chip on the table
[__] voice it fight for whatever you
feel called to do
but don't leave personal responsibility
on the table because there's so much
power in it
no i think it's both and look i i'm my
as
big a fan as i am of booker t washington
i think frederick douglass is one of the
sort of great badasses of all of history
this is a guy
who who uh beats the [__] out of his
slave master
he escapes from slavery he becomes one
of the great writers of his time
but but ultimately dedicates himself to
the eradication of slavery and so
i think this is a really important stoic
idea which is the purpose of philosophy
the purpose of the work the purpose of
success
is not merely to free yourself right
like
that that's ultimately a very empty
thing to
just pile up as many trophies or
or wins or or or whatever as possible
um you know jackie robinson had this
great it's actually on his tombstone
he says a life is meaningless uh in so
far as
its impact on uh other lives
right like the the meaning of life is
the impact that your life has on other
people's lives
and so the stoics that idea of justice
was about
impact was about helping others the
epictetus wasn't just using stoicism to
free
himself mentally and physically from
slavery
but then he becomes a writer and a
teacher and he
not only does he propagate the
philosophy all over rome
but marcus aurelius is introduced to
uh stoicism through the writings of
epictetus
just by the way as as abraham lincoln's
views on slavery are fundamentally
changed
through his interactions with frederick
douglass so
like you it's not just about freeing
yourself it's about
making an impact on the world and
freeing other people and they're of
course
in our modern world many ways to do that
whether it's with writings or videos or
or it's you know creating a non-profit
or maybe it's
creating a tech company that you sell
for billions of dollars and then you
then you use your power influence and
some other there's lots of ways to do it
but i
i think it's really important that that
the
the purpose of greatness is not for
furthering
your just your own your own self
right i'm with you but let's let's look
at jackie robinson which i think is a
great example and i admittedly only know
what was in the movie so it's entirely
possible i just don't understand the
realities of it
but in the movie it's presented that
hey what i need from you is not somebody
that can go out and confront these guys
and
you know shout them down it's i need
somebody that's not going to react
that's just going to be so good at
baseball that it becomes undeniable that
you belong here and of course he does
that and that opens the door
and so his his contribution at least as
i understand it
was through personal greatness by
showing people
by not reacting by not
being violent back or anything like that
by having composure
that he's able to break that sort of
break the back of the system that would
have argued they don't belong
or whatever and just showed if you want
the most exciting baseball played by the
most incredible people
then you you just have to open this up
and that to me is is what i'm saying is
there is a flip side of that
the the coin of solve the problem that
has become
either passe or people are outright
hostile towards it which is
go become a badass like become a badass
[__]
and i'm not sure if people will um get
the chills the way that i get the chills
with what i'm about to quote if they're
gonna be like this is [__] stupid
um but going back to jay-z he said
i can't help the poor if i'm one of them
i got rich and gave back to me that's
the win-win
and i thought like i get that like that
to me is powerful you're doing something
that serves you which i think is
important
but that also serves other people in a
larger context and few people
you know that i know of in that industry
have done a great job of reaching out to
other people to help them up
um so i don't know to me that's super
powerful
i think i think that's totally right and
and i think you can't you can't help
other people from a position of
powerlessness
um at the same time just achieving power
doesn't inherently help other people
it's i think it's both and so we have
these
this again attention of obligations to
ourselves and our own ambitions and
dreams
and then to other people and if you just
pursue one you're probably going to be
lopsided and not as effective as if you
if you tackle it from both sides well
said
i hate that this is true but i have to
rap now i will just say
my friend you are one of the most
important contemporary writers on the
planet
i am grateful that you do what you do
lives of the stoics is amazing
um we didn't get to cynicism and the
school thereof but for anybody
that reads your book they will they will
learn the story behind all of that
um where can people find you find the
book all that good stuff
no thanks man i love i love talking with
you and it's so much more fun than than
other podcasts where you just
kick around [__] uh so uh the book
is lives of the stoics everywhere books
are sold and then
if you want an email of stoicism every
day which i send out totally for free
you can go to dailystoic.com email
amazing brother i enjoy you as a human
being i think you're
thank you i cherish every moment we get
to spend together
uh i look forward to sharing space with
you again in the future
you got it man awesome everybody if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe and
until next time my friends be
legendary take care
he was perfectly uh built to beat cancer
but what he walked out from that was
maybe some twisting of the wires in it
in that uh
winning itself was now living and losing